*International Trade Economic Theories*
---
Traditional theories of international trade focuses on inter-industry trade of products between countries by analyzing the import and export of goods that cross national boundaries. They aim to understand what are the factors that are at the origin of the international specialization of the countries (i.e. what are the types of goods exported or imported by each country and why); the effects of the opening to international trade (who will gain and who will lose in the process of specialization); and finally, a third area of study (trade policy) concerns the possible actions to be taken to restrict imports and encourage exports, and the effects of these measures on the economic well-being.

According to the classical theory of absolute advantages (Smith, 1776), nations gain in trading between each other when one country has an absolute advantage in one production whereas the other country has an absolute advantage in producing a different good. In this conditions, both nations would benefit to produce the product in which they have the absolute advantage, and trade the product in which they have the absolute disadvantage. According to Smith, differences in production capacity among countries lead to a better division of labor at international level, which triggers economies of scales, efficiency and eventually growth. He criticized the mercantilist approach of considering trade as a zero-sum game, demonstrating that both countries can benefit from free trade (Zhang, 2008).
Ricardo (1817) went further the initial Smith’s intuition by introducing the notion of comparative advantages, according to which a country exports the product in which it has a comparative cost advantage and imports the product in which it has a comparative disadvantage. According to Ricardo, the primary determinant of international trade lies in the existing technological differences between different countries, which are substantiated in different relative productivity levels and different wages in different production sectors (Leamer et al., 1995) The combination of productivity and labor costs make it more convenient, for each country to produce only some goods and to import other goods from foreign countries, where such goods can be produced more cost effectively. The opening to international trade, therefore, leads each country to specialize in the production in which it is relatively more efficient (Zhang, 2008).

The necessary condition for this model to hold is the existence of a difference of "comparative costs", which in turn reflects differences in production techniques; in addition, the trade terms have to be between the comparative costs of the two countries, without never be equal to any of the two. Occurred both conditions, each country will have convenience to specialize in the production of the good that has the greatest relative advantage (or relatively minor disadvantage). Finally, it is assumed that costs of production in the two countries are constant and measurable using a common unit of measure, which is labor, and that only one country has an absolute advantage in the production of one of the two goods concerned. For simplicity the transport costs are ignored (Gandolfo, 2014)

Ricardo explained that the comparative advantage stems from differences in productivity of labor, but does not explain the reason why there is a difference in labor productivity between countries. In this regard, Heckscher and Ohlin (1933) argued that the comparative advantage rises from differences in the relative factor endowments. The countries differ from each other based on factors of production that they possess. Goods differ according to the factors of production that are required to produce them. The HO model supports that a country enjoys a comparative advantage in a specific good, if it has a good supply of input materials for its production. The basic logic is that the more abundant a factor, the lower its cost. The differences in factor endowments of the various countries explain differences in factor costs, differences that form the comparative advantage. Exemplifying the theory, it is possible to think of two factors of production, capital and labor (while in the Ricardian model the only factor of production was labor). The HO model assumes that the production methods are different among countries, even if their technology is the same: different methods result in different combinations of capital and labor. In other words, countries can choose different production methods based on the cost of production factors. Thus, the patterns of production and trade are explained by different factor endowments. It is convenient to export to foreign markets those goods produced with higher intensity by a factor relatively abundant and therefore less expensive (Gandolfo, 2014). 










